## 2.1 Principles of Network Applications
End systems typically communicate with other end-systems at the application layer, This is the layer that most network applications are built upon.

## 2.1.2 Network Application Architectures
Applications are developed by application developers selecting an **Application Architecture**, An application developers relies on the fact that the Network architecture is a fixed construct and utilizes the services provided by it to develop his application.

There are two paradigms of application architecture:
1) Server-to-Client Architecture: e.g the Web,  FTP and email
2) Peer-to-Peer Architecture: e.g BitTorrent

The application architectures is designed by the application developer which dictates how that application is structured among several end-systems.

in **Server-to-Client Architecture,** there is a fixed host which serves content to requesting hosts called clients, because of the fixed nature of the serving host they must posses a fixed address or IP that clients can access them. In real world applications a single serving host is not a scalable infrastructure hence the existence of data centers, this are cluster hosts that intelligently operate a single host. Server host do not (necessarily) communicate with other server hosts.

In **Peer-to-Peer (P2P) Architecture**, individual end systems or hosts, directly communicate with one another without the necessity of a server acting as an intermediary between their communication, This allows for a more decentralized form of networking that shoulders the responsibility of information exchanges on the hosts themselves, Hosts in this form of architectures are called peers. Simply; if a peer wants something its asks the peers that posses what it wants, How the exchange happens is of their concern and no one else’s (although sometimes an intermediary is required but its role is quite negligible).

## 2.1.2 Processes  Communicating
In Networking, **processes** are programs that handles the send and receipt of messages in an end system.

When processes run on the same end system and communicate with each other; this form of communication is known as **interprocess communication**

### Client and Server Processes
A network application consists of a pair of processes that exchange messages over a network. 

In a web application the client browser process exchange information with a web server process. In a network session that process that initiates the communication is labelled the client, while the one that receipts that initiation and possibly reply back with a message, is known as the server.

The same logic follows in P2P; the peer process that request for a file is the client process and the peer process that uploads the file is the client process (in that session), also a P2P peers can simultaneously be clients and servers.

### The Interface Between the Process and the Computer Network
Processes send/receive messages from a network through a software interface known as the **Socket**.

A socket is the interface between the application layer and the transport layer within a host, It is also referred to a the **Application Programming Interface (API)**, between the application and the network.

Given that the socket is the programming interface between network applications and the actual Network, application developers posses control on the entirety of the application layer side of the socket and little control of the transport layer side of the socket. 

The control limited to the application developer in respect to the transport layer side is only:
1) the choice of the transport layer protocol, and perhaps
2) Modification of some select parameters in that protocol

### Addressing Processes
In communication sessions, communicating processes require two pieces of information to confidently convey a message:
1) the address of the host the message is to be sent to
2) an identifier that specifies the receiving process of the destination host.
Luckily there the Internet Network provides answers to both questions, the first; **IP addresses** and the second; **Port Numbers**.

The receiving process of the destination host will be interfaced by it’s **receiving socket**.

## 2.1.3 Transport Services Available to Applications
What services can a transport layer protocol offer to the application layer invoking it? The possible services can be broadly classified along four dimensions:
1) Reliable data transfer 
2) throughput
3) timing and
4) security

## 2.1.4 Transport Services Provided by the Internet
There are two transport layer protocols made available by the internet:
1) TCP
2) and UDP

### TCP Services
The TCP services model a connection-oriented service and a reliable data transfer services. When an application utilizes this protocol, it receives both of this services.
* *Connection-Oriented service.* TCP demand a client and server exchange transport layer information first before messages can begin exchange at the application layer, this process is known as a **handshake**. Once a handshake a complete, **a TCP connection** is said to exist between the socket of both processes. Communication in a TCP connection is said to be full-duplex; because both sides can now send messages to each other over the connection at the same time. The connection must be teared-down once sendings are done.
* *Reliable Data Transfer Service*. Communicating services can relies on TCP to relay messages without error and in the right order. TCP also include a congestion mechanism, this mechanism throttles sending processes (client or server) when it notices network is congested between the server and client.

### UDP Services
This is a lightweight protocol offering minimal services, It is connection-less (no handshaking required for data exchange). It also provides unreliable data transfer; meaning that once a message is sent into a UDP socket, UDP does not guarantee that the message will ever reach its destination and even if they do, they might do so in the incorrect order.

There also is no congestion control mechanism.

### Services Not Provided by Internet Transport Protocols
They do not offer timing and throughput guarantees.

## 2.1.5 Application-Layer Protocol
An application protocol defined how many application process, running on different end-systems pass messages to each other, in particular the application layer protocol specify:
* They types of messages exchanged
* The syntax of various message types, such as field in the message and their delineation
* semantics of those fields (their meaning)
* Rules for determining when and how a process sends messages and responds to messages
It should be noted that an application itself is different from its application layer protocol. 

For example A browser is an application that communicates with a web server to display web pages which are served to the browser by it communicating with the server via the HTTP application layer protocol. Contents of those web pages are retrieved by the browser sending messages to a server. The content of those message are defined by HTTP.

Applications send messages—Those messages themselves are defined by the Application Layer Protocol.


