The internet provides two transport layer protocols; UDP (User Datagram Protocol)—Provides unreliable, connection-less service  to invoking applications and TCP (Transmission Connection Protocol)—Provides reliable connection-oriented service to invoking application.

Packets of the transport later are called segments, though the RFC refers to TCP packet as segments and UDP packets as data-grams.

The internet also provide s the IP network layer protocol wish offers a “best-effort” delivery model meaning it provides no guarantee to deliver segments between communicating hosts but will try it’s best.

It IP protocol also does not guarantee orderly delivery of segments neither does it guarantee integrity of the data in the segments, for this reason the IP protocol is labelled a unreliable service.

The fundamental responsibility of TCP and UDP is to extend the host to host communication linking that IP provides into a service that provides process to process communication linking between those hosts/end systems.

This process of extension is known as transport layer multiplexing and de-multiplexing. TCP and UDP also provide integrity checks by including error-detection fields in their segment's headers. 

UDP is an unreliable service which contrast TCP as it’s a reliable service, process to process linking and bare error checking are the only services UDP provides, unlike TCP which provides  congestion control (throttling sending rate in order to reduce stress on network points with perceived traffic) and reliable data transfer ensuring data is in their right order whilst still uploading their value integrity.

## 3.2 Multiplexing and De-multiplexing
The act of the transport layer relaying extracted data from received transport layer packets from the network layer to its destined socket for interaction with an intended process is known as **demultiplexing**

The act of gathering data chunks form a source host, encapsulating those data with additional transport layer header information to constitute a segment and passing those segments into the network layer for host-to-host distribution is known as **multiplexing**

It should be noted that socket have unique identifiers and segments have special fields that indicate the sockets to which the segment is to be delivered to, these special fields are the **source port number field** and the **destination port number field**.

Each port number is a 16 bit number, ranging from 0 to 65535. port number ranging from 0 to 1023 are called **well known port numbers**; they are also restricted; meaning they are reserved for well known application protocols (e.g HTTP→port 80)

List of well port number are defined by RFC 1700 by the Internet exchange task force.

### Connection-less Multiplexing and Demultiplexing UDP
A UDP socket is identified by a double valued tuple; its destination IP and destination port number

### Connection-based Multiplexing and Demultiplexing TCP
TCP sockets, unlike UDP’s are identified by a four valued tuple `1)` source IP address `2)` source port number `3)` destination IP address `4)` destination port number, thus TCP connected host uses these four values to perform multiplexing and demultiplexing of segments.

